Well good morning, how are we?
It is good to be with you today and I want to say good morning to those of us joining us in the online community and those of you joining us in the classic service.
glad that you guys are live with us this morning, worshiping and digging into the Word.
If I haven't met you yet, my name is Doug.
I'm one of the pastors here at Foot Hills and I would love to meet you.
So come say hi, shake my hand.
We've got a connect card in the chair pocket in front of you that you could fill out and just let us know that you are here.
And we'll share a little bit about who we are and you can share a little bit about who you are and we can start this thing off right, okay?
So please utilize that.
If you've got your Bibles, please grab those.
I'm gonna be in Isaiah 43.
And if you wanna join me,
We have a digital Bible app, then I'm gonna be using the ESV this morning so you can follow along in the same text that we are in.
There are moments in life that will tend to feel insecure where maybe leadership will fail or an institution crumbles, maybe our plans that we've tried to muster up
collapse.
And what you assumed would hold steady, it starts to tremble and then it doesn't.
And somewhere in that instability, a question will rise to the surface.
And it might be very quiet.
It might be not necessarily in defiance or anger, but it's the question that goes
Where are you?
Where are you, God?
And the texts we're looking at this morning in Isaiah 43, it's actually speaking into a moment like that for the people of Israel.
God's people were facing exile and their city had been threatened, their temple had been desecrated, their leadership was fully exposed,
And once what defined them as stable was now collapsing, and it's into that instability that God's gonna speak through Isaiah 43 today.
So join me in verse one, it starts this way, but now thus says the Lord, he who created you, O Jacob, he who formed you, O Israel, fear not,
For I have redeemed you, I have called you by name, and you are mine."
You might want to underline that you are mine.
What a striking way to begin his message.
There's no strategy for political expansion.
There's no
immediate correction that needs to be made by the Israelites, the followers of God.
There isn't any sort of economic reform that God is calling the people to.
Instead, He just says, I have redeemed you and you are mine.
In the face of all the instability, of everything happening,
with the people of Israel, he starts this way.
He starts with what I would call a covenant grounding.
Now real quick, we tend to throw around Christianese language like covenant, and I wanna make sure you're on board with me and know what I'm talking about when I say that.
So when I say covenant, what I'm talking about is how God is binding himself to his people with promises that are rooted
not in their performance, but in his character.
So the one who's speaking is the creator and the sustainer of all that exists.
He is the one who established covenant with Abraham and delivered them from Egypt.
He speaks not as a distant deity, but as their covenant Lord.
What does he say?
Fear not.
For I have redeemed you
You are mine.
This isn't him trying to tell the people to just muster up some emotional uplifting thoughts.
No, this is deliverance language.
This is ownership language.
It's purchase language.
He says, I have called you by name, I have.
That's personal.
And then if that's not personal enough, he goes, you are mine.
Any trembling soul could be steadied and calmed at the reality that the one who spoke the world into being, the one who gives the breath of life goes, you are mine.
Some of us know what it's like to grow up in an environment that's not steady, that doesn't have the protection that it should.
To feel unseen or to feel like no one has stepped in or to feel like we were left.
And when that's part of your story, you hear that you are mine and you see how it hits different.
It doesn't land so religious.
It sounds like rescue.
And that's where the people of Israel were at.
They weren't being told, you just need to perform better and Babylon will go away.
You don't need to correct anything and then I'll smite them.
You don't need to reform.
You don't need to prove anything.
He says, first and foremost, while you're in exile, I need you to understand something.
You are mine.
Really what he's pointing at in Isaiah 43 is that as Isaiah wants us to hear, I want you to look at what God has done.
I want you to look at who God is.
I want you to look at what he promises.
Then I want you to lean into that.
I want you to lean into that.
In verse two, he says, when you pass through the waters, I'll be with you.
And through the rivers, they shall not overwhelm you.
And when you walk through fire, you shall not be burned, and the flame shall not consume you."
I think it's so easy to read these passages.
I was just talking to my son the other day.
He's reading through the Bible, and he was telling me about what he was reading, and I said, just don't miss it.
It's so easy for us to just read through something and go, yeah, it's a lot of repetition, or it's a lot of poetry.
Slow down.
What is he saying?
This is one of the great imageries that we get.
I absolutely love this.
So a couple of reasons.
First of all, look at what he's not saying.
Look what he's not saying.
He's not saying, hey, if you pass through the waters, let me guess when you pass through the waters.
He doesn't say, I will keep you from all fire.
He says, when you walk through fire, see friends, what he's getting at is that the promise
is not absence of hardship.
The promise is presence in hardship.
That's incredible.
For Isaiah's original audience, a language would have immediately stirred up some memories.
Are you tracking with what the memories are?
Are you there?
When God separated the waters of the Red Sea in Exodus 14, He made a way for His people to walk through on dry ground.
The Egyptians are closing in behind them and there's these walls of water put up on either side and Israel passes through the sea.
Not because Israel is strong, not because they made a perfect sacrifice.
Not because they repented before they went through.
None of that.
Instead, he says, I will redeem you.
Let's go.
They leave Egypt and he goes, I've got you covered and he moves the water.
Why?
Because you're mine.
That's it.
No condition.
Incredible.
And if that's not incredible, I mean, I think about the river.
He talks about the river.
Well, that's a throwback to Joshua 3.
Joshua 3, the Israelites are trying to cross the Jordan River while it's at flood stage.
It was impassable.
And so again, God costs the waters to stand still so that they could walk through on dry ground.
So when he's saying you're going to pass through the waters, he's not being poetic.
He's actually recalling history, and he's reminding them that the God who made a way through the Red Sea, the God who stopped the Jordan River, that same God is still with you.
And if that were not enough, I love this.
You ever heard of Rackschach and Benny?
He says, when you walk through the fire,
You shall not be consumed.
Huh?
Can you tell anybody?
You shall not be burned.
This is incredible.
So not only in the ancient world does a fire represent destruction, devastation, judgment, cities were burned, nations were burned, temples were burned, and Isaiah is preparing them for the reality that Jerusalem itself is gonna be burned, and this isn't a prophecy to Raxchach and Benny.
However, if you're Raxchach and Benny and you're going, I remember that my God owns me, and that fire will not consume me, and so my identity is not Nebuchadnezzar, it's in my God, and then all of a sudden God redeems them.
and saves them further.
Is that amazing?
What Isaiah is trying to get at friends is that these people belong to God.
And because they belong to God, they will not be consumed.
They will be protected.
That's the thread that's holding this whole passage together.
You are mine.
The waters can't change that.
The fires of life can't change that.
Exile can't change that.
I think that means something super deep in studying for you and me.
You may walk through waters that feel overwhelming.
You may feel like there are fires burning all around you, and the defining reality of your life is not the intensity of the waters, it's not the presence of the hardship, it's the identity given to you by God.
I have redeemed you, you are mine.
If you're sitting here as a believer in Jesus Christ, you've come to the realization that you are not God.
that you have submitted yourself, you have recognized his kingship, that he alone is creator and sustainer, that he alone is the one who gives breath, you have recognized that he sent his son to die on a cross, to take your punishment for you, and then to cover you or atone you with his blood.
If you have come to realize that, then friends, you've been purchased by the blood, and that means you are his.
This is big.
This is big, this is an identity transformation.
You are no longer of this world.
You're of the kingdom of God, which means the waters will not consume you.
The fires will not consume you.
He says, I, look at verse three.
He goes, I am the Lord your God, the holy one of Israel.
You wanna underline something else?
Your savior.
He's the savior.
Look at what he says.
I give Egypt as your ransom.
Kush and see by an exchange for you.
Why?
I need you to hear this church.
Open your ears and your eyes.
I need you to see this because you are precious and honored.
And he says, I love you.
He says, I love you.
Not because you've gotten it right, not because you're sinless, not because you're morally perfect, not because you give so much or you go to church so often, you serve in so many ministries.
No, but because you are mine, you are precious to me and you are honored and I love you.
Yes, is this not incredible?
This blows my mind because who am I?
In light of who he is, who am I?
And yet he goes, I love you.
This is covenant loyalty language, friends.
This is the God of all that exists, the one who knit every cell together in not only your body, but in this world.
And he is describing the people who belong to him.
So if you belong to him, if you are a follower of Jesus who has been transformed and the spirit indwells you, he's talking about you.
Big deal.
Big, big deal.
John Calvin says it like this.
He says that when God calls Himself our Savior, He is testifying that He is the author of our safety so that we would not seek help anywhere else.
This is what Isaiah is trying to describe for the Israelites.
He's saying, God is cutting off every rival source of security.
You need nothing else.
Look at what God has done.
Look at who he is.
Look at what he promises.
And now in response that we got to lean in.
Look at verse five.
Fear not for I am with you.
These people were in exile.
The Babylonian empire was terrifying.
And he says fear not for I am with you.
The repetition to what he said earlier in the first couple of verses is on purpose.
See, the exile would tempt people to think that God had abandoned them.
That their sin had exhausted his patience.
That Babylon's gods were just more present and stronger.
But the Holy One says, no, brah, I'm with you.
I'm with you.
Not because of anything you've done, not because you performed well, but because he formed them and redeemed them.
Church, this is where dependence begins.
It begins with your identity.
You can't meaningfully lean into God until you know you belong to God.
And leaning in here, when I'm talking about leaning in in this sense, what I'm saying is, it means like when the fears rise around you, when those insecurities rise, you don't rehearse what could go wrong or what you could do to fix it.
Instead, you rehearse who he is and who you are.
in light of who He is.
That's what leaning in looks like.
When we're feeling tempted to look for affirmation in our saviors, in our saviors, our money, our career that we've invested so much time and energy into, our saviors like our relationships, it's incredible how often we use people to be our saviors instead of God Himself.
They complete me.
Wow.
That's rough if they complete you.
But that's what we do.
Is it not?
Am I wrong?
It's what we do.
We lean on finite humans to make us feel good about ourselves, to give us our identity.
We use careers.
What is the first thing you ask when you meet somebody?
So what do you do?
Like that's who they are.
We have all these saviors that we run to because they feel tangible.
They feel practical.
They give in in the moment feeling for us, but we're insatiable.
And so we keep striving and we keep looking for the things of this world to comfort us, to give us an identity.
When he goes, I've already identified you.
I've already chosen you and redeemed you and called you by name.
I formed you.
You are mine."
In verse eight, he shifts the tone.
It actually becomes more courtroom-like conversation.
He says, bring out the people who are blind, yet don't see.
Those who hear
But have ears.
All the nations gather together.
The people are to assemble.
This is covenant courtroom language.
He's summoning the nations before him.
And what he's doing is he's challenging the false gods.
He's asking questions that cut through the fog of the exile.
Look at what he says.
He goes, who among them, all the gathered nations, who among them can show us the former things.
You know, Red Sea, all that stuff that he brought up.
In other words, which of these gods, these Babylonian gods predicted history?
And which of these idols can declare the future?
Which of them can stand and testify?
Then I love verse 10, it answers it for us.
He goes, you are my witnesses and my servants whom I have chosen that you may know me and believe me and understand that I am he, God.
Before me, no God was formed, nor after me, will there be any God.
Friends, what a passage.
He is making the bold, lettered, exclamation mark of monotheism.
Before me, no God was formed, and there will be no God after me.
So why are you searching for God's in your career and in your relationship?
and with your money and with your time."
I love it.
He just hammers us.
Look at verse 11.
You know, you've probably heard countless times us go, when you hear something repeated, it's important, right?
Well, look at verse 11.
He goes, I pause.
I.
He's making a statement here.
He's saying, I,
I am the Lord.
And besides me, there is no Savior.
Wow.
He's trying to hammer home for us that we need to stop looking outside of him for comfort and belonging and for identity.
And instead notice him, see him, understand who he is and who we are in light of him.
Just like us, the Babylonians were surrounded by alternative saviors.
Political powers, cultural pressures, the temptation would be to hedge their bets on what feels tangible, what feels practical, what feels real in front of them.
But God completely dismantles that possibility.
He goes, besides me, there is no savior.
There won't be any gods after me.
In our day, you can even join a religion that says you'll be a God.
Nothing new.
Nothing new under the sun.
Now, we don't bow before Babylonian statues, but we're not immune to these saviors.
Whether it's our political outcomes, our reputation, our health, our control, those relationships.
And I need you to know
None of those things are evil in and of themselves.
The problem is when those things take our priority.
I mean, let's just be real for a moment.
I think about the amount of time and energy we put into career, that we put into a relationship, that we put into our stocks, or our retirement, or into our hobbies, or into our whatever.
And I compare that to the amount of time invested in our relationship with God.
It reveals, friends, it reveals for us who we think the real Savior is.
Isaiah is exposing this issue.
He doesn't rant, he's not shaming, he's just letting God speak.
He says it again, I, I am the Lord.
Leaning in here, leaning into all of this means that when we are being discouraged or tempted, we don't lean on those lesser saviors.
We refuse to give them authority in our lives because that belongs to God alone.
Are you guys with me on this?
We don't lean on ourselves.
We don't lean on our careers or on our giftings or on our strengths or whatever.
In our moment of instability, we go to our knees before God.
He's the only one that can save us.
He's the only one who can redeem us.
He's the one who calls us his and so he shows us who he is.
There's another shift in tone if you look at verse 14.
This is, it gets good, man.
Thus says the Lord.
Your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, he just keeps repeating this idea in case we haven't gotten it yet.
Your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, for your sake, I send a Babylon and bring all of them down as fugitives.
So God's speaking directly to Babylon here.
The empire that looked invincible, that looked permanent,
that had swallowed Judah whole, God goes for your sake.
See Babylon isn't ultimate.
The empire is not sovereign and history isn't random.
And so God is deliberately reminding them in verse 16 of the Exodus, look at this.
Thus says the Lord who makes a way in the sea, a path in the mighty waters, check this out.
He brings them back to the moment when there was no way forward, but God made one.
With Pharaoh and his people at their backs, they're trapped.
The Red Sea in front of them, there's nowhere to go but to death.
But because of who they are, God said, watch this.
Verse 18, I think is really funny after reading verse 16.
Look at this.
After reminding them of the Red Sea, he says, remember not the former things.
Nor consider the things of, I know I just brought up the Red Sea, but forget about it.
Why?
He goes, behold.
I'm doing a new thing.
And now it springs forth.
Do you not see it?
He's not telling him to erase their history.
He's not dismissing the exodus.
He's not minimizing why he himself is done.
But friends, check it out.
He's saying, don't limit me to how I worked before, because the God who split the sea is not confined to yesterday's methods.
No, he goes, I will make it.
You see it?
Look at it.
I will make a way in the wilderness.
And look at this, rivers in the desert, the impossible.
Look at what God has done.
Look at who He is, look at what He promises, and then we lean in.
These things are true for us as well, guys.
We know that there has been times in our lives where our Redeemer has stepped in, and He has moved, and He has made the impassable, passable.
We have to stay grounded in that reality.
We can't be distracted going, you know, our best days are behind us.
We can't say, well, our failures have limited what God can do through us.
Our story has already been written.
Isaiah says, don't limit him.
He's not confined to what he's done before.
He's still redeeming.
And when the, I love this, this is an amazing chapter, friends.
You should spend this week just going over it and going over it and going over it.
Look at verse 22, what he does.
Again, there's this, when everything feels so triumphant, look what he says.
He goes, isn't this great?
I redeemed you.
Hey, by the way, remember when you didn't call on me, but you have been weary of me?
Remember how you have not brought me your sheep for burnt offerings?
How you have burdened me with your sins, how you have wearied me with your iniquities.
Oh, okay, it's getting real, it's getting personal.
This was feeling good for a little bit.
Now he's gonna tell us we need to change.
Now he's gonna tell us how to do our sacrifices.
He goes, you didn't call on me.
And then look at verse 25.
I pause.
I am he who blots out your transgressions for whose sake?
My sake.
And I will not remember your sins.
He doesn't go because you've improved or because you tried harder, because you prayed more, because you gave more, or because you've just leaned in just enough.
You finally got victory over that one area.
He goes, no, no, no, he goes, no, just for my sake.
Friends, hear this.
Forgiveness flows from God's character, not our performance.
Got a text message yesterday from a student asking about, for a friend of his, just feeling the weight and guilt of his repeated sin.
And doesn't God just take away our salvation as the son, these are my words, kind of summing up what the text was?
And I'm like,
Nabrah, Romans 8, 1, for there is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus.
If you belong to the Father, he looks at you and he says, you are mine.
John 10, 27, no one can snatch them out of the Father's hand.
The Father has given them to me.
The Father and I are one.
No one can snatch them out of my hand.
There is victory in this.
If you're carrying shame or guilt, the weight of that, if I was just better, if I was just holier, if I was just, I mean, it's the stupid thing.
Everybody goes, pastors are so good and so holy.
Are you kidding me?
Hang out with my wife for a day.
You'll find out how broken I am, right?
I'm not qualified because of me.
I'm qualified because of him.
And that's the same for you.
You're not qualified to be a follower of Jesus because you don't cuss so much or you give so much or you serve.
None of that matters to him.
Isaiah 1, we talked about this weeks ago, he goes, all right, let's just settle the matter.
You know what?
Forget about it.
I'm gonna make you as white as snow.
That's why because you are his.
So leaning in here, friends, looks like when you fail,
You return quickly instead of hiding in a garden.
You hear me?
Because his mercy is grounded in his name, not in your consistency.
That's covenant mercy.
That's grace.
That's why dependence is not desperation.
It's alignment with reality.
Isaiah 43 isn't calling us to some spiritual striving.
It's calling us to spiritual dependency friends.
You belong to him.
There is no other savior.
He does more than you even recognize or see and his grace runs deeper than our failures.
So let's not live as though we've been abandoned.
Let's not lean on these lesser saviors, these false religions.
Ooh, you can be a God too.
What?
Let's not assume
The story is finished because of what he did before, but let's recognize he's not confined to the past.
He's gonna do a new thing in you.
So live out the reality of your identity.
Look at what God has done.
Look at who he is and look at what he promises and then friends lean in.
Let's pray.
I want to just embrace that so badly, Jesus.
There's so many days where I feel like it's on me, whether it's raising my children or performing in my career or my marriage.
I feel like it is all on me and I don't mean to say I have no responsibility, but Jesus, the reality is I move in response to you, not apart from you.
I move in response to you saying that I am yours and that you have redeemed me and it's out of that reality father that I want to live my life dependant fully on you.
I want to lead and love my children and my spouse and move in my career out of the overflow of the work you've done in me, not my own self.
And I pray that for the people in this room, Jesus.
My prayer is that your spirit would move deeply within them and as they go throughout their week that Father, your spirit would prompt them and remind them of who they are.
That they are precious and honored and that you love them so deeply, deeply enough.
that you sent your son to die on a cross for them, to atone for them, to cover them, to take on their punishment.
And Jesus, we get to live in the reality of that.
And so as we move forward today, Father, would we move forward as grateful people?
People recognizing and seeing you in the fires all around us.
The Father, we would keep our eyes fixed.
This world can be hard and it can be painful and it can be discouraging and it can be shiny and distracting.
The Father here this morning in our right mind, we recognize who we are in light of who you are and we say thank you for adopting us, for grafting us in, for perching us,
with your blood.
Thank you.
And so we live now, Jesus, in response to that.
We live our lives as worship to you.
Would it be a sweet and fragrant offering?
We live to lift up your name, Jesus.
All glory to you, Jesus.
All honor and all praise.
We cry out, holy, holy, holy with the host of angels.
Amen.
What a reality, man.
I wish that when I'm not in my right mind, I could remember those things far easier.
You know, it could be your thing this week is getting a piece of paper and writing, you are mine and putting it on your steering wheel right there.
It could be maybe you write it on the mirror in your bathroom, you are mine.
Maybe there's just some things that you need to do this week to keep that at the forefront of your thoughts.
that you are his, that you are redeemed.
Maybe just write redeemed.
Maybe tattoo on the bottom of your big toe, redeemed.
I don't know, something.
We just got to keep it there, man.
We just got to keep it at the forefront.
Hey, I hope you have a fantastic week pursuing Jesus leaning in.
You may have noticed that the student missionaries are out on the patio.
They are raising funds to go preach the gospel to Croatia.
We have been working hard over the last several years to build trust.
to build relationship, to build the foundation so that more and more Croatian young people can come to know Jesus in a country where less than 1% know Jesus.
By the grace of God, they hadn't seen any salvation in over 10 years and in the last two years we've seen three.
Our hope is that our work would be fruitful because the harvest is plentiful and there's a few laborers willing to head over there.
If you're willing to support them financially and through prayer we want to know,
The wall, if you're like, what is this?
How does it work?
Basically, there's an envelope on there that they decorated that has a number on it, and a dollar amount.
If you take that envelope,
You're declaring, I'm going to give this much to support this mission.
And so I just ask that you follow the slip inside.
You can give online through Venmo, check, cash, whatever.
But if you take an envelope, that's a commitment saying, we've got you.
We're going to support you and make this happen.
So please, if you will, go support our missionaries.
Ask them questions.
You'll see them all over the patio.
Ask them about what their mission is, how excited they are, what they're worried about, any of those things.
But let's go love them and support them well.
God bless you, friends.
If you came ready to tithe, boxes are in the back, otherwise you can give online, and we'll see you on Sunday.